osmiMentalHealthInTech/reports/secondBlogPost/draft/draftBlogPost.md, before:

# Data And Mental Health: The OSMI Survey 2016 - Part 2

_By [Michael Rosenberg](mailto:rosenberg.michael.m@gmail.com)_

# Introduction

Hi everyone! After performing a data analysis on the [Open Sourcing Mental
Illness](https://osmihelp.org) (OSMI) survey [previously](
https://medium.com/@tfluffm/data-and-mental-health-the-osmi-survey-2016-39a3d308ac2f), 
I got a lot of good feedback on my techniques and decisions
within the data science community and the mental health landscape. I appreciate
all of your thoughts and opinions, and I hope to stay involved in the
conversation related to data and mental health.

After looking over other components of the [OSMI Survey on Mental Health](
https://osmihelp.org/projects/research), I recognized some other components of
the dataset that could be mined for meaningful results. In particular, I 
recognized that there were many assets of the survey that took into account the 
opinions of respondents towards the mental health landscape in the industry. 
Using this opinion data, I was able to construct the analysis here today.

As discussed in my previous analysis, I have some ground rules:

* If you would like clarification in this analysis, please leave a comment 
below! I want to be as clear as I can when writing a report.

* If you have any questions on techniques used or components studied, 
also leave a comment! I really appreciate conversations on data-mining 
strategies.

With that being said, let's dive into the data.

# The Dataset

I spent some time in my previous analysis describing the OSMI Survey in detail.
Hence, I would recommend that you read through
[that section](https://medium.com/@tfluffm/data-and-mental-health-the-osmi-survey-2016-39a3d308ac2f)
of the previous analysis if you want the full details on the survey.

As mentioned earlier, the OSMI Survey contains several questions pertaining to
how respondent perceive mental health support in the workplace. Some of these
questions pertain to:

* Whether or not an employer provides coverage for mental health conditions in
the workplace healthcare plan.

* Whether an employer is supportive of mental health in the workplace.

* Whether one's colleagues (e.g. team members, direct supervisors) are
supportive of mental health in the workplace.

* If one believes that mental health conditions are regarded as taboo in the
industry as a whole.

I am interested in whether or not there is a set of patterns to the answers of
these questions that might indicate narratives about mental health in the
technology industry. In particular, I wonder if there are clusters
of respondents that each have a different perspective on how mental health is
dealt with in the workplace. Once I have discovered these perspective clusters,
I hope to see whether the demographics of respondents predict these perspectives
in some meaningful manner.

# Data Exploration

One of the key limitations we have to deal with is that individuals who are
self-employed do not fill out most of the information related to their 
employer or colleagues. Thus, in order to analyze this dataset, we must remove
self-employed persons from the analysis. This drops our number of observations
from 1433 to 1146, which is a sizable drop. That being said, self-employment is
a very different style of work than the typical salaried individuals working for
companies. In this sense, including them in the analysis will lead to
complicated interpretations of our results. Thus, while it does lead to a loss
of data points, self-employed individuals should only be considered in future
analyses.

![figure1](../figures/figure1.png)

_Figure 1: Distribution of whether or not an employer provides mental health 
benefits as part of health coverage._

We see that while a sizable number of individuals have some form of mental
health benefits as part of their health coverage, a moderate amount of
individuals are either not sure about their coverage or do not have coverage on
mental health. This is immediately concerning for the tech industry, as it would
suggest that a lot of workplace health care plans are not adequate for taking
care of mental health.

![figure2](../figures/figure2.png)

_Figure 2: Distribution of whether or not an employer offers resources to
learn more about mental health concerns and options for seeking help._

We see that most respondents claim their employer does not provide meaningful
resources to educate on mental health and seek help. This again shows a trend
that employers are typically not providing the benefits nor alternative
resources to address mental health.

![figure3](../figures/figure3.png)

_Figure 3: Distribution of answers for the question "Do you think that 
discussing a mental health disorder with your employer would have negative
consequences?"_

We see that most individuals lean no on this question, but there are still a
large portion of the sample that believes there will be negative consequences
for discussing a mental health condition with their employers. What these
negative consequences might be would be useful to capture in a future survey.

![figure4](../figures/figure4.png)

_Figure 4: Distribution of confort level talking about mental health with
coworkers_

We see that from the colleague-oriented side of mental health, our sample seems
uncomfortable talking about mental health with coworkers. This suggests that
our sample feels a sense of taboo about discussing mental health around the
workplace beyond an employer's opinions.

![figure5](../figures/figure5.png)

_Figure 5: Distribution of whether or not an individual was willing to bring up
a mental health issue with a potential employer during an interview._

We see that most individuals believe that they wouldn't bring up a mental health
issue during an interview. For the most part, this is somewhat unsurprising, as
it might be considered not relevant to certain parts of the interview process,
However, when you compare it to whether individuals would bring up a physical
health issue in an interview (see [this notebook](INSERT LINK HERE), Figure 11),
it becomes apparent that there is a greater taboo around discussing mental
health than discussing physical health.

# Model Selection

Given all this evidence for a taboo around mental health in the technology
workplace, I wanted to use a method that would take our responses on mental
health in the workplace and segment them into interpretable narratives. I
decided to use a [latent class model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latent_class_model) 
(LCM) to create this segmentation.

For building a model around mental health in the workplace, I chose around $19$
questions that I felt were relevant to this topic. This includes questions such
as:

* Does your employer provide mental health benefits as part of healthcare
coverage?

* Do you know the options for mental health care available under your 
employer-provided coverage?

* Would you feel comfortable discussing a mental health disorder with your 
direct supervisor(s)?

* Do you feel that being identified as a person with a mental health issue 
would hurt your career?

I have listed all $18$ questions in [my git respository for the project](
https://github.com/PLBMR/mentalHealthDataAnalysis/blob/master/osmiMentalHealthInTech/data/preprocessed/variablesForClustering.txt).

(_Note: The rest of this section is rather technical. It is reasonable to skip
over it!_)

## Model Explanation

In the context of our survey, the LCM works as such:

* We have $18$ questions in the survey on mental health in the workplace. Each
individual submits answers $a_1,a_2,...,a_{18}$ to these questions respectively.

* There are $k$ perspectives on mental health in the workplace. Each perspective
$i$ carries an answer distribution $D_i.$ Hence, there are $D_1,D_2,...,D_k$
distributions, and each one is associated with a particular perspective.

* Our LCM assumes that each answer group $(a_1,a_2,...,a_{18})$
comes from an answer distribution of a particular perspective. For instance, if
an individual's answers are $(a_1,a_2,...,a_{18}) \sim D_1$, then these 
answers come from perspective $1$.

* Our objective is to find the perspective assignment that best fits the
answers given by the respondents. The method we use to find this perspective
assignment is referred to as the [expected maximization algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expectation–maximization_algorithm).

This objective that measures how well we fit the answers given by respondents
is referred to as the [Likelihood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likelihood_function).
The likelihood measures how likely our model generated the answers found.

## Selection Process

We perform the following steps to select our latent class model:

1. We first split our dataset randomly into a selection set and an inference
set. We will use the selection set for solely building our final model, and we
will fit this model to the inference set for interpreting aspects of our model.

2. For selection, we will consider LCMs of between $1$ and $10$ classes. In this
context, this is considering LCMs with up to $10$ perspectives on mental health
in the workplace. To measure the performance of each of these models, we will
benchmark them using five-fold [cross-validation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-validation_(statistics)) on the
$\log$ of the likelihood of the data. We will choose the model with the
highest cross-validated log-Likelihood.

## Selection Results

![figure6](../figures/figure6.png)

_Figure 6: Our Cross-Validated Log-Likelihood on the number of classes
considered._

We see that the cross-validated log-likelihood increases until $3$ classes,
falters a bit after $3$ classes, and then drops significantly after $5$ classes.
Thus, we will select a latent class model with $3$ classes/perspectives.

# Inference

To recap, we chose a latent class model with $3$ classes to cluster the answers
to $18$ questions into different perspectives. Now that we have this model, it
is essential to interpret our model parameters in order to define what these
perspective clusters are in our dataset.

## Exploring the Clusters

![figure7](../figures/figure7.png)

_Figure 7: The prior probabilities on our classes/perspectives discovered by our
LCM_

We can interpret each of these probabilities as the chance that a randomly
picked respondent is assigned to a particular class. Thus, if we were to pull
a respondent at random, there is a $26.1\%$ chance of that respondent being from
class $1$.

We see that the largest class in our dataset is class $3$, with classes $1$ and
$2$ being smaller groups. We see that a random respondent has close to equal
chance of being either class $1$ or $2$.

I then studied the tables of class-conditional probabilities for answers to the
$18$ questions we clustered upon. I have left most of this analysis in my
[inference notebook](https://github.com/PLBMR/mentalHealthDataAnalysis/blob/master/osmiMentalHealthInTech/analysis/clusterAnalysis/clusterAnalysis_inference.ipynb),
But I think it would be useful to discuss some of these tables to make a claim
about the perspectives defined by our clusters.

![figure8](../figures/figure8.png)

_Figure 8: Class-Conditional Probabilities on whether or not a respondent's
employer provides mental health benefits as part of healthcare coverage._

In order to interpret this table, consider each row to represent a distribution
of answers given a class assignment to a respondent. For instance, given that a
respondent is assigned to class $1$, we are predicting that there is a $27.2\%$
chance that they would respond "No" to this question and a $11.7\%$ chance that
they would respond "Yes" to this question.

We see that Class $2$ primarily answers "Yes" on this question, while Classes
$1$ and $3$ generally emphasizes the other possible answers. Thus, class $2$
looks to represent individuals who are often have coverage for mental 
healthcare while classes $1$ and $3$ represent individuals who either uncommonly
or rarely have coverage for mental healthcare.

![figure9](../figures/figure9.png)

_Figure 9: Class-Conditional Probabilities on whether discussing a mental
health disorder with one's employer would have negative consequences._


![figure10](../figures/figure10.png)

_Figure 10: Class-Conditional Probabilities on answers to the question
"Would you feel comfortable discussing a mental health disorder with your 
direct supervisor(s)?"_

![figure11](../figures/figure11.png)

_Figure 11: Class-Conditional Probabilities on whether or not being identified
as a pareson with a mental healt condition would hurt one's career._


## Defining the Clusters

## Predicting the Clusters

# Discussion

# Limitations

# Future Work

Commit message:

Edited my draft a bit more

osmiMentalHealthInTech/reports/secondBlogPost/draft/draftBlogPost.md, after:

# Data And Mental Health: The OSMI Survey 2016 - Part 2

_By [Michael Rosenberg](mailto:rosenberg.michael.m@gmail.com)_

# Introduction

Hi everyone! After performing a data analysis on the [Open Sourcing Mental
Illness](https://osmihelp.org) (OSMI) survey [previously](
https://medium.com/@tfluffm/data-and-mental-health-the-osmi-survey-2016-39a3d308ac2f), 
I got a lot of good feedback on my techniques and decisions
within the data science community and the mental health landscape. I appreciate
all of your thoughts and opinions, and I hope to stay involved in the
conversation related to data and mental health.

After looking over other components of the [OSMI Survey on Mental Health](
https://osmihelp.org/projects/research), I recognized some other components of
the dataset that could be mined for meaningful results. In particular, I 
recognized that there were many assets of the survey that took into account the 
opinions of respondents towards the mental health landscape in the industry. 
Using this opinion data, I was able to construct the analysis here today.

As discussed in my previous analysis, I have some ground rules:

* If you would like clarification in this analysis, please leave a comment 
below! I want to be as clear as I can when writing a report.

* If you have any questions on techniques used or components studied, 
also leave a comment! I really appreciate conversations on data-mining 
strategies.

With that being said, let's dive into the data.

# The Dataset

I spent some time in my previous analysis describing the OSMI Survey in detail.
Hence, I would recommend that you read through
[that section](https://medium.com/@tfluffm/data-and-mental-health-the-osmi-survey-2016-39a3d308ac2f)
of the previous analysis if you want the full details on the survey.

As mentioned earlier, the OSMI Survey contains several questions pertaining to
how respondent perceive mental health support in the workplace. Some of these
questions pertain to:

* Whether or not an employer provides coverage for mental health conditions in
the workplace healthcare plan.

* Whether an employer is supportive of mental health in the workplace.

* Whether one's colleagues (e.g. team members, direct supervisors) are
supportive of mental health in the workplace.

* If one believes that mental health conditions are regarded as taboo in the
industry as a whole.

I am interested in whether or not there is a set of patterns to the answers of
these questions that might indicate narratives about mental health in the
technology industry. In particular, I wonder if there are clusters
of respondents that each have a different perspective on how mental health is
dealt with in the workplace. Once I have discovered these perspective clusters,
I hope to see whether the demographics of respondents predict these perspectives
in some meaningful manner.

# Data Exploration

One of the key limitations we have to deal with is that individuals who are
self-employed do not fill out most of the information related to their 
employer or colleagues. Thus, in order to analyze this dataset, we must remove
self-employed persons from the analysis. This drops our number of observations
from 1433 to 1146, which is a sizable drop. That being said, self-employment is
a very different style of work than the typical salaried individuals working for
companies. In this sense, including them in the analysis will lead to
complicated interpretations of our results. Thus, while it does lead to a loss
of data points, self-employed individuals should only be considered in future
analyses.

![figure1](../figures/figure1.png)

_Figure 1: Distribution of whether or not an employer provides mental health 
benefits as part of health coverage._

We see that while a sizable number of individuals have some form of mental
health benefits as part of their health coverage, a moderate amount of
individuals are either not sure about their coverage or do not have coverage on
mental health. This is immediately concerning for the tech industry, as it would
suggest that a lot of workplace health care plans are not adequate for taking
care of mental health.

![figure2](../figures/figure2.png)

_Figure 2: Distribution of whether or not an employer offers resources to
learn more about mental health concerns and options for seeking help._

We see that most respondents claim their employer does not provide meaningful
resources to educate on mental health and seek help. This again shows a trend
that employers are typically not providing the benefits nor alternative
resources to address mental health.

![figure3](../figures/figure3.png)

_Figure 3: Distribution of answers for the question "Do you think that 
discussing a mental health disorder with your employer would have negative
consequences?"_

We see that most individuals lean no on this question, but there are still a
large portion of the sample that believes there will be negative consequences
for discussing a mental health condition with their employers. What these
negative consequences might be would be useful to capture in a future survey.

![figure4](../figures/figure4.png)

_Figure 4: Distribution of confort level talking about mental health with
coworkers_

We see that from the colleague-oriented side of mental health, our sample seems
uncomfortable talking about mental health with coworkers. This suggests that
our sample feels a sense of taboo about discussing mental health around the
workplace beyond an employer's opinions.

![figure5](../figures/figure5.png)

_Figure 5: Distribution of whether or not an individual was willing to bring up
a mental health issue with a potential employer during an interview._

We see that most individuals believe that they wouldn't bring up a mental health
issue during an interview. For the most part, this is somewhat unsurprising, as
it might be considered not relevant to certain parts of the interview process,
However, when you compare it to whether individuals would bring up a physical
health issue in an interview (see [this notebook](INSERT LINK HERE), Figure 11),
it becomes apparent that there is a greater taboo around discussing mental
health than discussing physical health.

# Model Selection

Given all this evidence for a taboo around mental health in the technology
workplace, I wanted to use a method that would take our responses on mental
health in the workplace and segment them into interpretable narratives. I
decided to use a [latent class model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latent_class_model) 
(LCM) to create this segmentation.

For building a model around mental health in the workplace, I chose around $19$
questions that I felt were relevant to this topic. This includes questions such
as:

* Does your employer provide mental health benefits as part of healthcare
coverage?

* Do you know the options for mental health care available under your 
employer-provided coverage?

* Would you feel comfortable discussing a mental health disorder with your 
direct supervisor(s)?

* Do you feel that being identified as a person with a mental health issue 
would hurt your career?

I have listed all $18$ questions in [my git respository for the project](
https://github.com/PLBMR/mentalHealthDataAnalysis/blob/master/osmiMentalHealthInTech/data/preprocessed/variablesForClustering.txt).

(_Note: The rest of this section is rather technical. It is reasonable to skip
over it!_)

## Model Explanation

In the context of our survey, the LCM works as such:

* We have $18$ questions in the survey on mental health in the workplace. Each
individual submits answers $a_1,a_2,...,a_{18}$ to these questions respectively.

* There are $k$ perspectives on mental health in the workplace. Each perspective
$i$ carries an answer distribution $D_i.$ Hence, there are $D_1,D_2,...,D_k$
distributions, and each one is associated with a particular perspective.

* Our LCM assumes that each answer group $(a_1,a_2,...,a_{18})$
comes from an answer distribution of a particular perspective. For instance, if
an individual's answers are $(a_1,a_2,...,a_{18}) \sim D_1$, then these 
answers come from perspective $1$.

* Our objective is to find the perspective assignment that best fits the
answers given by the respondents. The method we use to find this perspective
assignment is referred to as the [expected maximization algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expectation–maximization_algorithm).

This objective that measures how well we fit the answers given by respondents
is referred to as the [Likelihood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likelihood_function).
The likelihood measures how likely our model generated the answers found.

## Selection Process

We perform the following steps to select our latent class model:

1. We first split our dataset randomly into a selection set and an inference
set. We will use the selection set for solely building our final model, and we
will fit this model to the inference set for interpreting aspects of our model.

2. For selection, we will consider LCMs of between $1$ and $10$ classes. In this
context, this is considering LCMs with up to $10$ perspectives on mental health
in the workplace. To measure the performance of each of these models, we will
benchmark them using five-fold [cross-validation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-validation_(statistics)) on the
$\log$ of the likelihood of the data. We will choose the model with the
highest cross-validated log-Likelihood.

## Selection Results

![figure6](../figures/figure6.png)

_Figure 6: Our Cross-Validated Log-Likelihood on the number of classes
considered._

We see that the cross-validated log-likelihood increases until $3$ classes,
falters a bit after $3$ classes, and then drops significantly after $5$ classes.
Thus, we will select a latent class model with $3$ classes/perspectives.

# Inference

To recap, we chose a latent class model with $3$ classes to cluster the answers
to $18$ questions into different perspectives. Now that we have this model, it
is essential to interpret our model parameters in order to define what these
perspective clusters are in our dataset.

## Exploring the Clusters

![figure7](../figures/figure7.png)

_Figure 7: The prior probabilities on our classes/perspectives discovered by our
LCM_

We can interpret each of these probabilities as the chance that a randomly
picked respondent is assigned to a particular class. Thus, if we were to pull
a respondent at random, there is a $26.1\%$ chance of that respondent being from
class $1$.

We see that the largest class in our dataset is class $3$, with classes $1$ and
$2$ being smaller groups. We see that a random respondent has close to equal
chance of being either class $1$ or $2$.

I then studied the tables of class-conditional probabilities for answers to the
$18$ questions we clustered upon. I have left most of this analysis in my
[inference notebook](https://github.com/PLBMR/mentalHealthDataAnalysis/blob/master/osmiMentalHealthInTech/analysis/clusterAnalysis/clusterAnalysis_inference.ipynb),
But I think it would be useful to discuss some of these tables to make a claim
about the perspectives defined by our clusters.

![figure8](../figures/figure8.png)

_Figure 8: Class-Conditional Probabilities on whether or not a respondent's
employer provides mental health benefits as part of healthcare coverage._

In order to interpret this table, consider each row to represent a distribution
of answers given a class assignment to a respondent. For instance, given that a
respondent is assigned to class $1$, we are predicting that there is a $27.2\%$
chance that they would respond "No" to this question and a $11.7\%$ chance that
they would respond "Yes" to this question.

We see that Class $2$ primarily answers "Yes" on this question, while Classes
$1$ and $3$ generally emphasizes the other possible answers. Thus, class $2$
looks to represent individuals who are often have coverage for mental 
healthcare while classes $1$ and $3$ represent individuals who either uncommonly
or rarely have coverage for mental healthcare.

![figure9](../figures/figure9.png)

_Figure 9: Class-Conditional Probabilities on whether discussing a mental
health disorder with one's employer would have negative consequences._

We see that classes $1$ and $2$ generally believe that there won't be negative
consequences for discussing mental health with one's employer, while class $3$
leans towards the answers of "maybe" and "yes." Thus, this suggests that classes
$1$ and $2$ have generally more support on mental health from their employers
than class $3$.

![figure10](../figures/figure10.png)

_Figure 10: Class-Conditional Probabilities on answers to the question
"Would you feel comfortable discussing a mental health disorder with your 
direct supervisor(s)?"_

We see that Class $2$ generally feels comfortable discussing mental health with
their direct supervisor(s). Class $1$ seems to feel "yes" or "maybe" comfortable
with this type of discussion, and Class $3$ generally does not seem comfortable
discussing mental health with a supervisor. Thus, this would suggest that
class $2$ faces high support over mental health with their direct supervisors,
and classes $1$ and $3$ face moderate and weak support respectively.

![figure11](../figures/figure11.png)

_Figure 11: Class-Conditional Probabilities on whether or not being identified
as a person with a mental health condition would hurt one's career._

We see that class $3$ generally thinks that this identification would hurt their
career, while classes $1$ and $2$ generally think that it would only "maybe"
hurt their career or that it would not hurt their career.

## Defining the Clusters

## Predicting the Clusters

# Discussion

# Limitations

# Future Work
